## TGA - Time Groups Analyzer

### Overview

TGA is originally available at 
<http://wwwhomes.uni-bielefeld.de/gibbon/TGA/>. It's a tool developed
by Dafydd Gibbon, emeritus professor of English and General Linguistics at
Bielefeld University. 

>*Dafydd Gibbon* (2013).
>**TGA: a web tool for Time Group Analysis**,
>Tools ans Resources for the Analysis of Speech Prosody,
>Aix-en-Provence, France, pp. 66-69.

The original TGA is an online batch processing tool which provides a 
parametrised mapping from time-stamps in speech annotation files in 
various formats to a detailed analysis report with statistics and 
visualisations. TGA software calculates, inter alia, mean, median, 
rPVI, nPVI, slope and intercept functions within inter-pausal groups, 
provides visualizations of timing patterns, as well as correlations 
between these, and parses inter-pausal groups into hierarchies based 
on duration relations. Linear regression is selected mainly for the 
slope function, as a first approximation to examining acceleration 
and deceleration over large data sets.

*The TGA online tool was designed to support phoneticians in basic 
statistical analysis of annotated speech data*. In practice, the tool 
provides not only rapid analyses but also the ability to handle larger 
data sets than can be handled manually.

In addition to the original one, a second version of TGA was implemented 
in the AnnotationPro software:

>*Katarzyna Klessa, Dafydd Gibbon* (2014).
>**Annotation Pro + TGA: automation of speech timing analysis**,
>9th International conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), 
>Reykjavik (Iceland). pp. 1499-1505, ISBN: 978-2-9517408-8-4.

The integrated Annotation Pro + TGA tool incorporates some TGA features and
is intended to support the development of more robust and versatile 
timing models for a greater variety of data.
The integration of TGA statistical and visualisation functions into 
Annotation Pro+TGA results in a powerful computational enhancement of the  
existing AnnotationPro phonetic workbench, for supporting experimental
analysis and modeling of speech timing.

So, what's the novelty into the third version implemented into SPPAS...

First of all, it has to be noticed that TGA is only partly implemented 
into SPPAS. The statistics analyses tool of SPPAS allows to estimates TGA 
within the SPPAS framework; and it results in the following advantages:

- it can read either TextGrid, csv, Elan, or any other file format supported by SPPAS,
- it can save TGA results in any of the annotation file supported by SPPAS,
- it estimates the two versions of the linear regression estimators: the original one and the one implemented into AnnotationPro:

    1. in the original TGA, the x-axis is based on positions of syllables, 
    2. in the AnnotationPro+TGA, the x-axis is based on time-stamps. 


### Perform TAG with the GUI


The TGA process takes as input a file that strictly match the
audio file name except for the extension and that "-salign" is appended.
For example, if the audio file name is "oriana1.wav", the expected input file
name is "oriana1-salign.xra" if .xra is the default extension for annotations.
This file must include time-aligned syllables in a tier with name "SyllAlign".

The annotation provides an annotated file with "-tga" appended to its name,
i.e. "oriana1-tga.xra" for the previous example.
This file is including 10 tiers: 

1. TGA-TimeGroups: intervals with the time groups
2. TGA-TimeSegments: same intervals, indicate the syllables separated by whitespace
3. TGA-Occurrences: same intervals, indicate the number of syllables
4. TGA-Total: same intervals, indicate interval duration
5. TGA-Mean: same intervals, indicate mean duration of syllables
6. TGA-Median: same intervals, indicate median duration of syllables
7. TGA-Stdev: same intervals, indicate stdev of duration of syllables
8. TGA-nPVI: same intervals, indicate nPVI of syllables
9. TGA-Intercept: same intervals, indicate the intercept
10. TGA-Slope: same intervals, indicate the slope

Both tiers 9 and 10 can be estimated in 2 ways (so 2 more tiers can be generated).

To perform the annotation, click on the TGA activation button
and click on the "Configure..." blue text to fix options.


### Perform TGA with the CLI


`tga.py` is the program to perform TGA of a given file with time-aligned 
syllables.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
usage: tga.py [options]

optional arguments:
    -i file     Input file name (time-aligned phonemes)
    -o file     Output file name
    -s string   Time groups prefix label
    --original  Estimates intercepts and slopes like in the original version
    -h, --help   Show the help message and exit
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
